---
layout: post
title: "A Primer on the Apparent Movements of the Celestial Bodies"
author: "Daniel Ames"
categories: journal
tags: [documentation,sample]
hide_related_posts: true
epigraph: "salimmo sù, el primo e io secondo, <br>
tanto ch’i’ vidi de le cose belle <br>
che porta ’l ciel... <br>"
---

In grade school, many of us were introduced to the rudiments of astronomy; we learned that the earth and seven other planets orbit the sun, that the moon likewise orbits the earth, and that these orbits are all elliptical; we were made to memorize the phases of the moon, the order of the planets, etc. But as homely as these bare facts may seem, they are in reality quite theoretical. They are divorced from our daily experience of the sky, and to our detriment we received little grounding in the relations that hold between this little cache of abstract knowledge and the celestial phenomena that we perceive when, by night, we chance to cast a glance upward.

I do not blame our teachers. It is not a trivial task to connect the theoretical knowledge of astronomy back to the evidence of the senses from which it was, over the course of millennia, so painstakingly derived. Nevertheless, it is an end worthy of pursuit. 

[comment]: # If we ever wish to feel at home in the world, we must not take the very stars that look down upon us for strangers. 



To begin the process of integration, we must deliberately suppress some of our knowledge. We know on a theoretical level that the stars we observe at night are light-years away from us and from one another. Yet, this fact does not help us to make sense of the spectacle of the night sky. While it is true that some stars appear brighter than others and their hues vary from reddish to bluish, and that these observational facts do bear an indirect relation to their relative distances, yet when we are first forming a mental model to connect observation to theory, it is better to forget the relative distances and to imagine the stars as all lying upon the same fixed sphere, which is known as the __celestial sphere__. The stars are indeed so far from us that the eye cannot even make out the changes in their relative positions as the earth orbits the sun, and so the earth always appears to be at the sphere's center. 

As the earth rotates, we observe the turning of the celestial sphere about an axis. The fixed north pole of this axis happens to fall upon a star, which, for that reason, is called the pole star.

The celestial sphere will be the backdrop with reference to which all other celestial movements will be described. The celestial sphere appears to "drag" all other celestial bodies along in its turning, and so when I speak of the movement of these latter among the stars rather than with them, I will call it their _proper_ movement. So, for example, the turning of the celestial sphere (which, again, is the same as the rotation of the earth) is the cause of the sun's daily arc across the sky, but the proper movement of the sun among the stars is in fact contrary to its daily trajectory.

All this leads us to one of the properties that distinguish celestial objects from terrestrial ones: on the scale of daily human life celestial objects are not subject to parallax. For example, say that I am driving south, and to the west I see a remarkably tall peak jutting out above a mountain range. I know that as I continue to drive the peak will soon recede towards the northwest. In a matter of seconds, my movement has altered the peak's apparent position on the compass. This is parallax. Celestial objects, however, being many orders of magnitude more distant than the point at which terrestrial objects dip below the horizon, do not experience any apparent shift as one moves (whence that eerie feeling one sometimes gets that the moon is looking over one's shoulder). Observation of the sky thus has much in common with our ever-more frequent experiences of virtual worlds, only depending as it does upon an observer's approximate latitude: I can access the same view of the night sky at any number of locations, just as I can access the same website from any number of computer terminals. All of this is quite convenient in a sense: we need not worry overmuch about taking into account our perspective as observers so long as we know our approximate latitude.


 [comment]: # A fundamental distinction in naked-eye astronomy is that between fixity and changeabliity: the stars appear fixed relative to one another, and all other visible bodies (the sun, the moon, and the visible planets) appear to move relative to one another and to the fixed stars. Some of the latter also exhibit observable changes of phase or diameter.



 [comment]: # The ancients took great pleasure in the contemplation of what was to them the self-evident harmony of the heavens. They called such harmonious beauty the music of the spheres. 

# Note on Laplace

For the title of this post, I borrowed a phrase from the quaint language of 18th century science found in Laplace's _Exposition du système du monde_, a wonderful work whose first chapter covers much of the same material as I do here. While eschewing mathematical sophistication, Laplace does not hesitate to present to the reader the reasoning, in all of its conceptual complexity and with an extreme precision of language, by which astronomers have arrived at their conclusions. 

It is almost beyond belief that so illustrious a scientist should have deigned to compose what is essentially an elementary textbook, one so elementary in fact, that its author does not omit to define an ellipse when the concept arises. What is even more incredible is that he condescended to the laity in this way not once but twice, publishing "Essai philosophique sur les probabilités", which gives an elementary and conceptual treatment of the other of the two fields of study for which he is best known today. Perhaps Laplace, being a man of the enlightenment, saw the now-forgotten value in putting to paper _a series of economical arguments and inductions_ through which any citoyenne or citoyen may _get at the causes of phenomena_.




